---
layout: post
title: Millburn
author: Jesse Fried
categories:
  - land-use
  - suburbs
  - cities-and-towns
  - essex-county
category-name: millburn
---

## The Whiteness of Millburn

Growing up white in Millburn, racial issues always seemed distant to me. Important, sure, but in the abstract. Like trade policy, or farm subsidies. The town is diverse in a lot of ways, and the very few black kids in my school, whom my social circle and personal shyness didn't put me much in contact with, blended into the town's fairly multiethnic background. It only occurred to me once I left that a place like Millburn is ground zero for the enforcement of white supremacy in America. Aggressive practices of segregation help actively preserve the town's identity.

Consider Millburn's location. The town's southeastern boundary cuts off just short of Springfield Avenue, one of the main, if clogged, arteries of Newark, a majority black city. Largely black suburban neighborhoods in Union's Vauxhall section and Maplewood lie directly across Millburn's border. In fact, one of the closest food places to the house I grew up in, and one of the few open late, was a fried chicken place on Springfield Ave, with a largely black clientele. It never occurred to me to go there (again, until after I left). My brother and his friends, more adventurous than me and mine, went occasionally, but even so they tended to favor the walk or drive across town to the very suburban but undeniably sketchy 7 Eleven on Morris Ave.

Northeast of Milburn is Maplewood, a liberal commuter town that spans some modest urban-suburban neighborhoods closer to Newark and some super wealthy suburban ones to the west ("Maplehood" and "Maplegood" are terms I've heard used to distinguish them, though the whole town is pretty nice overall). Maplewood has a good-sized black population, and though there are underlying problems, I would describe it as an integrated town. It's the kind of liberal town where people are interested in discussing race and trying to work on these issues. However, their school system is not quite as good as Millburn's.

The other suburban towns around Millburn — Livingston to the north, Chatham to the west, Summit to the southwest, and Springfield to the south — have a bit more geographic insulation for their whiteness.

So Millburn is really just barely over the border into White Jersey. Going west from NYC, I believe it's the first Republican-controlled municipality you'll get to. An anecdote: As a kid going to the Whole Foods in Millburn with my mom (which I loved doing), which since moved to more of a big-box store location on Springfield Ave, I noticed that a huge portion of the shoppers were black. Now, this is Whole Foods — a parking lot full of nice cars and checkout lines of classy looking people. This sight surprised me and confused my youthful racist assumptons. Newark is reportedly getting a Whole Foods soon, but I think at present if you live anywhere in that whole urban area and want fancy groceries, you have to make the trek in to the suburbs.

This bourgie journey involves crossing a very real barrier, because, with a few exceptions, such as the basketball court in Taylor Park, Millburn seems to be hostile territory for black people. I have only anecdotal evidence for this conclusion but listen to this: my uncle, who also lives in Millburn, sometimes hires a guy from Irvington to do yard work for him. Now, my uncle is very curious about how NJ society works, and asked this guy about being black while in Millburn. He said you are generally ok walking down the main streets, but if you are walking down a residential street, there's a good chance a cop will come and harrass you. The threat of outrageous treatment by the Millburn police is very real — I have some stories involving white people, but they're probably not worth telling. I wouldn't be surprised if these geographic restrictions were common knowledge among many black men of Essex County. I've had a lot of very awkward interactions on Millburn Ave, walking by someone keeping their head down, refusing to make eye contact, seeming to try to look as unthreatening and meek as possible.

An obsessive fear, shared by many Millburn residents, of home invasions, car break-ins and muggings lends support to these police tactics. It must be stated that these fears are not entirely without basis, but they are extremely exaggerated. Millburn is not a small town, by any means. In the largest, most comprehensive sense, it is a wealthy neighborhood of the New York City metropolis. There is going to be crime — and in fact, there is crime even in small towns, but given the extreme wealth disparity in metro NJ it's not hard to understand why we have crime — so lock your car door and don't leave your wallet and iPhone on the passenger seat.

But the fact is, many people in Millburn believe they live in a small town. This type of delusion classically underlies suburban social life. The urban and industrial areas of metropolitan NJ are out of sight, out of mind. Most people are probably looking at their iPads, not out the window, on their daily commute. Sad that they don't feel pride in the beauty of the or a sense of common destiny with their brethren with smaller front yards. I think many people in the suburbs fail to see their urban neighbors as relevant to their lives at all — as part of the same region, larger culture and political destiny. It's a closed-minded attitude which really works to no one's benefit, but is easy to fall into.

This willful ignorance of urban NJ on the part of suburbanites also has some interesting irony to it. Many residents of NJ's suburban towns — especially Italians, Jews, Irish, etc. — have strong historical connections to modest, dense neighborhoods in Newark and cities like it, where their families lived through the mid 20th century. As the familial memories of struggling with poverty and 20th century ethnic discrimination fade in the bright lights of the malls, an awareness of the sites of those struggles dims too. Racism is a nice mental crutch to easily explain away the strange state of affairs.

I should add that I'm not immune to this attitude either. I too grew up with a really bad sense of what Newark was like, when I happened to think about it at all. Meeting people from Newark and Irvington and East Orange in college and in the larger world, I definitely had some awkward moments when we were talking about where we were from. Now as I come to understand that urban Essex County is a very interesting and culturally rich area, with a shared cuture and history with the suburbs, I hope to figure out a way to become more involved in that world.

Some hope: public community events in Maplewood, South Orange and places like them; NJPAC; Branch Brook Park... 
